---
layout: default
---

## General Writings

### Philosophical Defense Mechanisms

I remember reading how the unconscious part of our brain has the power to trigger certain actions in times of danger to save our lives. For example, let's say I've met with an accident, and I've hurt my leg. I'm losing blood fast through a wound in my leg. In this situation, my unconscious mind recognizes the imminent danger to my life and immediately springs into action. In the very next instant, I lose my consciousness, and I lie fainted at the accident site. This loss in consciousness was triggered by my unconscious mind as a means of saving blood.

The conscious mind takes up considerable amount of blood laden with oxygen and energy to keep itself running. A continuous flow of blood is essential for thinking and responding activities of the conscious mind. But I'm now lying on the ground with my leg bleeding, with only fear and pain gripping my thoughts. In this situation, there is little my conscious mind can do. At least, that's what my unconscious mind "thinks." Also, the life-threatening situation may well cause my conscious mind to consume more blood than normal situations, and all that extra blood is only fuel for more pain and fear. So, what does my unconscious mind do? It cuts off the blood supply to my conscious mind, and I faint. The blood, which is being lost through the wound, is now more efficiently used by supplying it to my vital organs. This helps me unconsciously hold on to my life longer until, hopefully, I'm given medical care, and I regain consciousness once things are back to normal. 

This action by the unconscious mind is a physiological defense mechanism triggered by a threat to one's physical existence, and I hypothesize that there are analogous defense mechanisms that are triggered by threats to one's understanding of reality, originating from the human brain's fundamental ability to perceive causality at a deeper level than other life forms. I like to call them philosophical defense mechanisms. 

What are some examples of philosophical defense mechanisms? I believe that these defense mechanisms have taken the shape of various fantastical beliefs, and since these beliefs have no apparent evidence to corroborate them, we find them rooted in our religious identities, which are faith-based rather than evidence-based. One such belief that has made its way to the everyday parlance of so many of those belonging to Hinduism is the idea of "Karma." I will not try to define or explain "Karma" because, one, there are far better resources from far more qualified people than me from whom one can learn and, two, to define "Karma" is not the purpose of this post; I'm merely interested in its usage in modern times. In fact, its usage gives us a clear indication that we could trace its origin to a philosophical defense mechanism.  

The human mind has evolved to question all that is happening around it. It constantly seeks to form a causal link between events to quench its thirst of curiosity. What is that flash of light from the sky? How did that tree catch fire? Why does it feel warm around the fire? How is it that the food taste better when briefly held before the fire? Neurons in the mind are firing continuously while the mind tries to form patterns, perceive links, and discover truths. But when answers are not easy to come by, the mind turns to fiction and fabricates its own convenient answers. But with some minds being more curious than others, humans have been able to look past such fictions and discover the truths about nature and reality though observation, theorizing, experimentation, and verification. Science has advanced our knowledge about nature's secret. Today, we know longer hold on to previous widely held beliefs such as shooting starts and eclipses being bad omens or diseases being cause by evil spirits. However, there are questions that are still beyond the grasp of science, questions for which science may never find answers. These are the questions of why.

Why does a new born baby, alive only for a brief time, have to suddenly waste way and die of a nameless disease? Why does an individual of noble heart and unquestionable character be forced to endure a crippling disability for no fault of anyone? Why does innocent people have to be subjected to unspeakable horrors in the hands of other people? These and many more such questions of morality and humanity for which science has no answers. For these questions, therefore, the mind turns, in desperation, to fiction: A universal accounting of morality spanning several births and deaths. Logic and reason fails to give an adequate and acceptable answer to our question of why we wilt in the depths of pain, misery, and suffering, and before our mind devolves into a state of delirium and insanity, the philosophical defense mechanisms inherent in our unconscious minds kick in, and the fiction of "karmic dharma" keeps us sane and gives us hope.

[back](./)

### The Four Stages of a Modern Hindu

**Introduction**

I am neither religious nor an expert in religious studies. Any errors or
misjudgments on my part must be forgiven by the readers. What I've written here
is based on my experiences growing up as part of a (mostly conservative) Hindu
family in a country where Hinduism is the dominant religion. So, I thought it
would make sense to have the title of this piece to be what it is rather than a
more generalized one, such as "Five Stages of Religiosity." Though
divided in stages, there can be significant overlap among the stages, which you
might notice as I discuss each stage. On the other hand, the stages are
distinctly ranked in order, and the ranking itself is completely my subjective
(and humble) opinion. The discussion under each stage goes into the reason for its
ranking. At a fundamental level, I could say that the ranking is influenced by innate
characteristics and tendencies, such as empathy, selfishness, altruism, greed,
and sacrifice that we all possess to a certain degree. We begin with the lowest
ranked stage and move up the ladder.

**(4) The Briber**

As the name suggests, the briber is only interested in the divine when they
want something. They offer to do this or do that in exchange for god's gifts.
Though praying for a divine intervention is also something that The Performer
(the next stage) does, what differentiates The Briber's prayers is that their
requests are always materialistic or shallow --- a new car, a new house, more
money, more fame, and so on. So, The Briber is no different from a child who
remembers to pray only before an exam. Other behaviors distinctive of The
Briber may include lack of interest in praying for others (selfishness) and not
being satisfied with what one is bestowed with (greed). Since there is an
overlap of behavioral tendencies with The Performer, we must carefully examine
what the purpose of the prayer is in order to identify the stage. For example,
a person may pray to god for a suitable partner to marry. This may seem
materialistic (it may very well be), but the person may simply be searching for
love and care, which cannot be deemed as materialistic. So, the person would be
a Performer rather than a Briber.

**(3) The Performer**

The Performer loves to put on a show. For a Hindu, the performances usually
include rituals such as yajnas, loud chanting of mantras, pilgrimages to
distant holy places, and various physical demonstrations such as prostrating.
There can be a number of commonalities between a briber and a performer, but
the distinction lies in the purpose of the performance. The performer truly
believes that the show being put up is integral to one's daily life, so the
show goes on irrespective of the circumstances. For example, a briber may
forget about praying during the good times or may curse the gods during the bad
times, whereas the performer is consistent in his practices at all times. The
performer can also be selfless and altruistic, performing for others'
wellbeing, unlike the briber. However, the performer can be quite dogmatic. As
a result, there is a feeling of anxiety and doubt when there is a misfortune in
life, the performer then believes that it was a result of a missed performance
or that a performance has not pleased the gods. Furthermore, the performer is
easily swayed by godmen as well as crooks, for whom the performer is a reliable
cash cow (the briber, on the other hand, is not as reliable). There is also
some overlap between the performer and the reader (the next stage). One could
say to some degree that the former is an extrovert whereas the latter is an introvert
when it comes to religious practices. With modern Hinduism stressing heavily on
rituals and pilgrimages, the performer may very well be the majority or, in
other words, the majority of the Hindu population tend toward performative behavior.

**(2) The Reader**

The reader does not lay emphasis on performative practices, rather he is
interested in reading and learning. As mentioned earlier, the reader possesses
an introverted personality. So, unlike the performer who prefers to discharge a
religious act in front of an audience, the reader is happy to spend time
reading a religious text in solitude. Though their ultimate purpose of their
prayers may be the same, I have placed the reader above the performer because
of the nonmaterialistic intentions of the former. This also means that the
reader is not easily swayed by false promises of fortune made by godmen.
However, the reader can be just as dogmatic as the performer; the dogma is
associated with words and ideas for the reader, whereas it was with actions for
the performer. So, the knowledge that the reader gains from hours and hours of
reading and learning is only superficial, and the reader stops short of
contemplating about the knowledge.

**(1) The Philosopher**

The modern Hindu philosopher is not very different from a conventional
philosopher. As I had hinted in the previous section, the word
"contemplation" is key to defining the philosopher. Knowledge is not
the end but rather the means for the philosopher, the means to understanding a
deeper truth. Thus, the philosopher is one who is striving to rise above dogma,
questioning and researching religious ideas and not blindly accepting their
sanctity. Though they cannot be considered as modern, the two popular Hindu
saints of the past, Adi Shankara and Ramanuja come close to being the perfect
Hindu philosophers. (However, I wouldn't call them perfect because they still
accepted without question the authority of the Vedas.) Not only did both these
men possessed vast knowledge but they also introduced highly influential ideas
and philosophies in Hindu religion. Many of their ideas are still followed
sincerely by Hindus today. One who strives to become the philosopher is
open-minded and tolerant, in addition to being nonmaterialistic.

**Conclusion**

The four stages are ranked this way because I believe that a modern Hindu,
throughout their life, should constantly aim to move up the ladder and reach
the highest stage, the philosopher, irrespective of the stage in which they
currently belong. It is natural for one to be merely a briber at a young age,
and most become performers or readers. But among them, many find themselves
stuck in the same stage until their death since the ascendency to the final
stage requires time and effort.

[back](./)


### My feeble attempt at Microfiction

There was a flash fiction contest at IIT Madras organized by the writing club. I'm not much of a fiction writer, I have to admit, but I thought I give it a go. Selected entries were to make it to the following month's e-magazine put together by the club. Unfortunately, my entry did not make the cut. So, I'm going to share it here instead. 

We were given a list of writing prompts. I chose, "An unexpected delivery". A microfiction is usually about 300 words long. Here is my attempt:   



> Ramu hesitantly pushed the door ajar and peeked outside. He noticed a familiar face at the end of the dimly lit corridor. With the heavy bag emblazoned with the word "ekart" swinging left and right, a young man came running towards him. 

> All day, Ramu had been pacing about next to the rickety bed despite his illness that kept him in isolation. The delivery was expected at any time, and Ramu was in a room at the hospital, far away from the maternity ward.

> "So, uh… what...", quivered Ramu in nervous excitement.

> "Congrats anna, you are a father of twins!", replied the young man still panting and smiling.

[back](./)
