---
layout: default
---

## My Personal Writings

### 365 Days of Lockdown


**PRELUDE**

COVID-19 was still a distant threat then. It was the last week of February 2020, and my supervisor had forwarded me the acknowledgement of submission from the journal to which we had submitted the revised manuscript of our second paper. In the early days of March 2020, “quarantine” and “lockdown” were the buzzwords as Italy declaring a nation-wide lockdown made headlines. Of course, lockdown was already in place in some regions of China, but it did not grab as much attention as the Italian one. May be if it did, things could have been different. Closer to home, the virus was still perceived to be possibly on the way piggybacking returnees from other countries rather than something that has already arrived. So, unsurprisingly, the first sign of official cautionary message in the form of an email from IITM administration was nothing more than an advisory for international travelers. It was a Wednesday when we received the email, and I had not travelled to the campus that entire week. Thankfully, I had completed all the experiment work of my research. So, I wasn’t going to campus daily, and with news of the virus circulating, it was decided that I would work from home that week—little did I know that the week would stretch to months.  I was travelling by bus and suburban trains which were rarely not crowded. So, the decision was an easy one to make. Just five days before the (should I say, infamous?) “Janata Curfew” of 22nd March 2020, all the students and scholars at IITM were instructed to vacate the hostel and leave the campus. Of course, nothing was known about the national lockdown then, so many who delayed the departure from the campus found it difficult to reach their homes… homes located in different parts of the country. You cannot blame anyone for thinking that they will return to the campus once this virus thing blows over in a couple of weeks. Among them, there must have been hundreds of scholars like me at different stages of their research—some forced to suspend their experiments, some only in their first year formulating the research problem, and some nearing the end of their research having already faced frustrating delays. As for myself, I had just drawn up the plan for the remaining computer simulations that need to be carried out for my research to reach “completeness”.

**BEGINNING OF LOCKDOWN**

The nation-wide lockdown was announced and was set to begin from 24th March 2020. The chaos which ensued in the following days is well-covered and already forgotten. Though a certain degree of fear and anxiety lurked deep down, the proliferation of the pandemic was morbidly fascinating to follow courtesy the daily updates of those infected, some fatally. I decided to use the numbers to practice my data visualization skills! Starting from the first week of April, I regularly tracked the COVID cases in Tamil Nadu for two months and posted the graphs here.  The first week of April also brought some good news—acceptance of my second paper. Looking back, I consider it a crucial milestone because the second paper carried the bulk of my experiment work. The paper had to wait for an unusually long time (nearly three months) before it was made available online, but it was worth the wait. Soon, we received the reviewers’ comments for the third paper, and we submitted the revised paper at the end of the month. With most of my attention on the papers, the simulation work was put on the back burner during April. The end of April also saw daily detected COVID-19 cases touching the 100-mark in Tamil Nadu, and the lockdown was extended.

**THE INTERLUDE**

For those privileged enough, the lockdown seemed like a spectacle—a slow somber drama sprinkled with moments of hope and humor viewed through the screens of smartphones, computers, and televisions. I am fortunate to be among the privileged, as I was then. Many would agree that the pandemic and its repercussion were a litmus test of the values of our times: humanism, empathy, international co-operation, and rationalism. Any democracy that came out of this crisis with its democratic values unscathed can consider the feat to be a crowning achievement. The pandemic is still ongoing, and the number of countries that can claim such an achievement is shrinking. For the individual, the pain and the suffering varied in degree and kind. Again, I was grateful that myself and those around me were only subjected to bearable levels of anxiety and fatigue. So, between May and August, my research work trudged along. The acceptance of the third paper in June was encouraging because it signaled the forthcoming end of my PhD. The simulations were in progress and I had written the voluminous literature review chapter of my thesis. 

**THE VIRTUAL SYNOPSIS**

I had spent the second half of August on drafting my synopsis report and presentation. After countless emails between me and my supervisor, the report was ready to be submitted. On 1st of September, I sent the final synopsis report along with other documents to my supervisor, which he forwarded to the department. Three days later, I received the Google meet confirmation for the synopsis meeting scheduled on the morning of 9th September. The meeting, after being cancelled the very next day because of the unavailability of one doctoral committee member, was rescheduled on the afternoon of 9th September, the notification of which I got on 8th! I have an inexplicable dislike for video meetings, so when I was told that I need not turn on the camera, and I only had to share my screen showing the presentation while I was speaking, I was noticeably relieved. On the day of the presentation, I really did not have to prepare for the presentation; I had some notes by my side; even those notes were not necessary because I was presenting <i>my</i> work. What I did have to prepare for were the proper working of all the accessories (web camera, headphone, internet connection) essential for a smooth virtual meeting. The meeting lasted for about 45 minutes, and it went better than I expected. Many people tend to get very nervous when speaking in front of others (I used to get nervous too during my school days, but I had improved considerably since then). I can imagine these video meetings to be nothing short of a godsend to them. With the synopsis done, all my attention for the rest of the month was focused on wrapping up the simulations and writing the last paper before organizing the remaining chapters of my thesis.

**THESIS SUBMISSION**

What I was hoping to wrap up in a month, took me nearly three months. At the end of November, we had sent the fourth paper to a second journal after it was rejected by the first journal. In academia, any researcher would tell you that you had to take such rejections—some of which are outright baffling—in your stride if you wished to cope with the pressures surrounding research and make progress in your work. As I had completed my synopsis, I had no reason to worry though. However, as I neared the end of my PhD, there was a new question dawning on the horizon—What after PhD? Naturally, my supervisor was pushing me to apply for post-doctoral positions in a foreign country because it was an obvious path for a PhD graduate in Indian academia. To me, though, the idea of postdoc hunting in the middle of a pandemic with all the countries closing their borders seemed strikingly surreal, and yet, it was expected of me, and it was expected of many others who are on the verge of completing their PhD. I tried not to think about the question, as I applied the finishing touches to my thesis. On 3rd December 2020, after nearly seven years since I began my doctoral program, I was ready to submit my thesis and accompanying documents. It was midday and after uploading the files in Google drive, the thesis was sent with a single click of the mouse … which turned out to be a mistake because I had pasted a slightly wrong link to the Google drive folder that contained the files! So, minutes later, with a quick note of apology and the correct link in a second email, I submitted my thesis with a single click of the mouse for the second time! Then, I got up; I walked to the balcony; I looked outside for a few seconds; I came back to my seat; I turned to my laptop and began reading some football news. It was over.

**THE POSTLUDE**

In the middle of November, I had applied for the post of technical editor at a company named Cactus Communications. Besides my inclination towards writing and editing, the option of working from home made the position quite attractive. Though I had interest in teaching and research, I felt that the editing role was tailor-made for me. But I thought I needed (still do) to improve my writing skills, for which this editing role would be a perfect platform, whilst keeping in touch with research done by others.  In my mind, a career as an editor was emerging as a promising path. Later, in January, after a couple of online tests and a video meeting, I was offered a freelance editor contract. Meanwhile, I was testing the waters in another job which later did not turn out to be suitable for me, and after a week of illness (no, not COVID), I accepted the contract and signed up as a freelance editor. On the first week of March, my first earnings from editing were transferred to my bank account. It was also my first earnings not directly related to academia (earlier incomes were mostly scholarships during master’s and PhD). By 24th March 2021, I had completed six editing assignments which accounted for 24,274 words. Incidentally, March 24th marked a full year of lockdown. All the little milestones I had crossed from the comfort and convenience of my home during these 365 days are utterly unthinkable without the care and support of my family. 

### The Manuscript Merry-go-round

The most satisfying as well as, in my opinion at least, the most important part of the work of a scientist or a researcher is to share the results of the research conducted. It is so because of the amount of time and effort one has put in to the work with the belief that the end result would make a contribution, however minuscule it may seem, to the scientific body of knowledge which is now open (somewhat restrictively, maybe) to be read, understood, criticized, used and improved by the academia of the world. However, for young researchers like myself, publishing research is increasingly accompanied by a feeling of relief rather than satisfaction while the process itself starting from manuscript preparation to final acceptance of the revised paper is dotted with moments filled with a range of emotions - mild annoyance to tragicomedy. 

I write this on the day when I have gone through the manuscript publication process the third time in two weeks. On both the two previous occasions, the editor of the respective journals declined to forward the manuscript with the reason that the presented work was beyond the scope of the journal which I am inclined to accept. The idea of relevance can be of varying degrees. Let's say my work is relevant to two different journals - say journal X and journal Y. Journal Y has a better impact factor and more importantly has a faster review speed on average than journal X. Now, even though my work is a little more relevant to journal Y, I would at least have a go at journal X hoping I would get lucky. But I have not been so lucky on the first two occasions. The editor of the second journal was more considerate and replied with a link to transfer the manuscript to another journal (the third one). Yet, we had to fulfill the specific conditions of the third journal before approving the submission. 

As we wait for the reply from the editor of the third journal, both myself and my supervisor were struck with a question: What if this editor also declines and suggests the name of the first journal as being more relevant? Although comical at first, the thought of my manuscript being stuck in some kind of editorial time loop is a little disconcerting. I am reminded of the turbulent times I've read about when young Darwin hesitated publishing his groundbreaking theory of evolution fearing the repercussions of challenging the dogmatic ideas of the Church. Well, today, my work is neither groundbreaking nor am I nowhere near prodigious as Darwin and yet I fear publishing my work because of the dreaded review process. Hopefully, my manuscript will not be burnt to ashes because I exceeded the preferred length of the double line spaced template by a few pages.
