---
layout: post
title:  "Philosophical Defense Mechanisms"
date:   2022-10-10 05:10:00 +0530
categories: jekyll update


---

I remember reading how the unconscious part of our brain has the power to trigger certain actions in times of danger to save our lives. For example, let's say I've met with an accident, and I've hurt my leg. I'm losing blood fast through a wound in my leg. In this situation, my unconscious mind recognizes the imminent danger to my life and immediately springs into action. In the very next instant, I lose my consciousness, and I lie fainted at the accident site. This loss in consciousness was triggered by my unconscious mind as a means of saving blood.

The conscious mind takes up considerable amount of blood laden with oxygen and energy to keep itself running. A continuous flow of blood is essential for thinking and responding activities of the conscious mind. But I'm now lying on the ground with my leg bleeding, with only fear and pain gripping my thoughts. In this situation, there is little my conscious mind can do. At least, that's what my unconscious mind "thinks." Also, the life-threatening situation may well cause my conscious mind to consume more blood than normal situations, and all that extra blood is only fuel for more pain and fear. So, what does my unconscious mind do? It cuts off the blood supply to my conscious mind, and I faint. The blood, which is being lost through the wound, is now more efficiently used by supplying it to my vital organs. This helps me unconsciously hold on to my life longer until, hopefully, I'm given medical care, and I regain consciousness once things are back to normal. 

This action by the unconscious mind is a physiological defense mechanism triggered by a threat to one's physical existence, and I hypothesize that there are analogous defense mechanisms that are triggered by threats to one's understanding of reality, originating from the human brain's fundamental ability to perceive causality at a deeper level than other life forms. I like to call them philosophical defense mechanisms. 

What are some examples of philosophical defense mechanisms? I believe that these defense mechanisms have taken the shape of various fantastical beliefs, and since these beliefs have no apparent evidence to corroborate them, we find them rooted in our religious identities, which are faith-based rather than evidence-based. One such belief that has made its way to the everyday parlance of so many of those belonging to Hinduism is the idea of "Karma." I will not try to define or explain "Karma" because, one, there are far better resources from far more qualified people than me from whom one can learn and, two, to define "Karma" is not the purpose of this post; I'm merely interested in its usage in modern times. In fact, its usage gives us a clear indication that we could trace its origin to a philosophical defense mechanism.  

The human mind has evolved to question all that is happening around it. It constantly seeks to form a causal link between events to quench its thirst of curiosity. What is that flash of light from the sky? How did that tree catch fire? Why does it feel warm around the fire? How is it that the food taste better when briefly held before the fire? Neurons in the mind are firing continuously while the mind tries to form patterns, perceive links, and discover truths. But when answers are not easy to come by, the mind turns to fiction and fabricates its own convenient answers. But with some minds being more curious than others, humans have been able to look past such fictions and discover the truths about nature and reality though observation, theorizing, experimentation, and verification. Science has advanced our knowledge about nature's secret. Today, we know longer hold on to previous widely held beliefs such as shooting starts and eclipses being bad omens or diseases being cause by evil spirits. However, there are questions that are still beyond the grasp of science, questions for which science may never find answers. These are the questions of why.

Why does a new born baby, alive only for a brief time, have to suddenly waste way and die of a nameless disease? Why does an individual of noble heart and unquestionable character be forced to endure a crippling disability for no fault of anyone? Why does innocent people have to be subjected to unspeakable horrors in the hands of other people? These and many more such questions of morality and humanity for which science has no answers. For these questions, therefore, the mind turns, in desperation, to fiction: A universal accounting of morality spanning several births and deaths. Logic and reason fails to give an adequate and acceptable answer to our question of why we wilt in the depths of pain, misery, and suffering, and before our mind devolves into a state of delirium and insanity, the philosophical defense mechanisms inherent in our unconscious minds kick in, and the fiction of "karmic dharma" keeps us sane and gives us hope.