---
layout: post
title:  "The Four Stages of a Modern Hindu"
date:   2022-03-20 05:10:00 +0530
categories: jekyll update


---

###Introduction

I am neither religious nor an expert in religious studies. Any errors or
misjudgments on my part must be forgiven by the readers. What I've written here
is based on my experiences growing up as part of a (mostly conservative) Hindu
family in a country where Hinduism is the dominant religion. So, I thought it
would make sense to have the title of this piece to be what it is rather than a
more generalized one, such as "Five Stages of Religiosity." Though
divided in stages, there can be significant overlap among the stages, which you
might notice as I discuss each stage. On the other hand, the stages are
distinctly ranked in order, and the ranking itself is completely my subjective
(and humble) opinion. The discussion under each stage goes into the reason for its
ranking. At a fundamental level, I could say that the ranking is influenced by innate
characteristics and tendencies, such as empathy, selfishness, altruism, greed,
and sacrifice that we all possess to a certain degree. We begin with the lowest
ranked stage and move up the ladder.

###(4) The Briber

As the name suggests, the briber is only interested in the divine when they
want something. They offer to do this or do that in exchange for god's gifts.
Though praying for a divine intervention is also something that The Performer
(the next stage) does, what differentiates The Briber's prayers is that their
requests are always materialistic or shallow --- a new car, a new house, more
money, more fame, and so on. So, The Briber is no different from a child who
remembers to pray only before an exam. Other behaviors distinctive of The
Briber may include lack of interest in praying for others (selfishness) and not
being satisfied with what one is bestowed with (greed). Since there is an
overlap of behavioral tendencies with The Performer, we must carefully examine
what the purpose of the prayer is in order to identify the stage. For example,
a person may pray to god for a suitable partner to marry. This may seem
materialistic (it may very well be), but the person may simply be searching for
love and care, which cannot be deemed as materialistic. So, the person would be
a Performer rather than a Briber.

###(3) The Performer

The Performer loves to put on a show. For a Hindu, the performances usually
include rituals such as yajnas, loud chanting of mantras, pilgrimages to
distant holy places, and various physical demonstrations such as prostrating.
There can be a number of commonalities between a briber and a performer, but
the distinction lies in the purpose of the performance. The performer truly
believes that the show being put up is integral to one's daily life, so the
show goes on irrespective of the circumstances. For example, a briber may
forget about praying during the good times or may curse the gods during the bad
times, whereas the performer is consistent in his practices at all times. The
performer can also be selfless and altruistic, performing for others'
wellbeing, unlike the briber. However, the performer can be quite dogmatic. As
a result, there is a feeling of anxiety and doubt when there is a misfortune in
life, the performer then believes that it was a result of a missed performance
or that a performance has not pleased the gods. Furthermore, the performer is
easily swayed by godmen as well as crooks, for whom the performer is a reliable
cash cow (the briber, on the other hand, is not as reliable). There is also
some overlap between the performer and the reader (the next stage). One could
say to some degree that the former is an extrovert whereas the latter is an introvert
when it comes to religious practices. With modern Hinduism stressing heavily on
rituals and pilgrimages, the performer may very well be the majority or, in
other words, the majority of the Hindu population tend toward performative behavior.

###(2) The Reader

The reader does not lay emphasis on performative practices, rather he is
interested in reading and learning. As mentioned earlier, the reader possesses
an introverted personality. So, unlike the performer who prefers to discharge a
religious act in front of an audience, the reader is happy to spend time
reading a religious text in solitude. Though their ultimate purpose of their
prayers may be the same, I have placed the reader above the performer because
of the nonmaterialistic intentions of the former. This also means that the
reader is not easily swayed by false promises of fortune made by godmen.
However, the reader can be just as dogmatic as the performer; the dogma is
associated with words and ideas for the reader, whereas it was with actions for
the performer. So, the knowledge that the reader gains from hours and hours of
reading and learning is only superficial, and the reader stops short of
contemplating about the knowledge.

###(1) The Philosopher

The modern Hindu philosopher is not very different from a conventional
philosopher. As I had hinted in the previous section, the word
"contemplation" is key to defining the philosopher. Knowledge is not
the end but rather the means for the philosopher, the means to understanding a
deeper truth. Thus, the philosopher is one who is striving to rise above dogma,
questioning and researching religious ideas and not blindly accepting their
sanctity. Though they cannot be considered as modern, the two popular Hindu
saints of the past, Adi Shankara and Ramanuja come close to being the perfect
Hindu philosophers. (However, I wouldn't call them perfect because they still
accepted without question the authority of the Vedas.) Not only did both these
men possessed vast knowledge but they also introduced highly influential ideas
and philosophies in Hindu religion. Many of their ideas are still followed
sincerely by Hindus today. One who strives to become the philosopher is
open-minded and tolerant, in addition to being nonmaterialistic.

###Conclusion

The four stages are ranked this way because I believe that a modern Hindu,
throughout their life, should constantly aim to move up the ladder and reach
the highest stage, the philosopher, irrespective of the stage in which they
currently belong. It is natural for one to be merely a briber at a young age,
and most become performers or readers. But among them, many find themselves
stuck in the same stage until their death since the ascendency to the final
stage requires time and effort.
